alright thank you very much and welcome
to session 500 wireless directions it's
truly amazing how much Wireless has
permeated our lives since we introduced
airport in 1999 in today's session we're
going to hear from product marketing
going over the current state of the
union of where wireless's we're then
going to look at several updates that
have happened recently with Airport 3.1
and move into futures that will be
integrating with Panthers so with that I
would like to introduce Lars reader who
is the product marketing manager for
wireless technologies at thanks for
coming today to the wireless direction
session hope everyone's having a good
show think it was a pretty amazing to be
able to get one of those cameras I wish
I could have one who'll India from a big
chatter and I'm want to get on the video
chat thing about three months or so ago
I was asked to put some slides together
to sort of capture what's happened over
the course of the last year and wireless
and extracts from that some of the
trends or some key bits of information
to pass along to you as developers that
you might be able to use in your active
wireless solutions that you're working
on today or if you're sitting on the
fence wondering whether or not you need
to make the investment in Wireless will
want to make the investment a wireless
so the gentle nudge in the direction of
of getting started with your solutions
the flow of the presentation today is
really to start talking about 80 2011 at
a grander level if you will or more
broadly then with the help of two of our
studly wireless engineers Phil Kearney
and Paul rokita will talk about some of
the updates to airport extreme it all
come back in and talk about Bluetooth
and then at the very end I'll actually
begin a discussion or a dialogue about
where we could take wireless how we can
get to the next level and some of the
opportunities that lie within that and
then time permitting well some questions
and answers at the end
and Flickr doesn't want to work before
we actually get into anta 2011 I want to
talk a little bit about the matrix the
wired Wireless matrix this is a slide
that we actually put up last year at the
right of the developers conference to
sort of really assist in clearly
positioning the wireless technologies
against they're wired counterparts and
the context of the time it was done it
was actually a very useful and important
slide that there was a lot of sort of
confusion particularly around Bluetooth
at the time so with this simple slide
we've actually done a lot for the
industry to really focus folks into the
right general areas this is also
something that's permeated not beyond
Apple there's folks other major players
in the industry that have adopted
similar positioning as well as
organizations like the bluetooth sig or
the special interest group which I'll
come back to you talk about a little bit
later the message here is actually
fairly simple but it's extremely
powerful and here really as a developer
but we suggest or recommend is if you're
working on a solution that requires a
lot of networking or requires the
transmission of large amounts of data
over the air we really suggest that you
gravitate towards 80 2011 if however
you're thinking about more peripheral e
oriented solutions to a computer or are
not sending as much data over the air
and that data tends to be very bursty in
nature then bluetooth is probably more
appropriate for you to use now back so
let's jump into 802 11 beginning with
airport extreme airport extreme is the
third generation Airport product that we
introduced this year just January that
was very same facility to Macworld San
Francisco and wandering around here
today I've actually noticed quite a
number of folks to have actually picked
up an airport extreme enabled system
which is really exciting to see and
whether you know it or not you're part
of a very special statistic which I'll
come back to in a few minutes and having
had actually those units there you're
sure you've actually firsthand so felt
the the power and the flexibility of the
airport extreme product but I'm not sure
if you're aware or not the actual design
the roots of the design for airport
extreme go all the way back to nineteen
ninety nine when we built our first
airport product at the time the design
goals for that product were essentially
to make it fast affordable and easy to
use that was the mantra for the original
Airport product and packaging that all
together was a very successful wireless
launch for us last year as we were
looking at airport extreme and you know
coming up with our design goals for this
product we kept those three things at
heart those were still part of the core
aspects for airport extreme but we
didn't stop there we actually went
further we've talked to a lot of
customers whether their consumers or
institutions and captured from them
their desires and their concerns as well
so we added in two more elements to the
design of the product one is
compatibility this was a big message
folks are telling us no matter where you
go with wireless how are you taking it
forward make sure you don't leave us
behind who invested with you back in
nineteen ninety nine when the first
Airport products came out so
compatibilities of important piece to
the airport extreme solution the other
is flexibility we heard time and time
again for various folks different
stories some that say you know my
extreme network is great but I can't
quite reach out to like the Far room in
a house or across the pathway if you
will to another building on a campus
call or college campus organ heard folks
talking about you know I've got a lot of
base stations that are up and running I
want to be able to dial back some of
that power to prevent channel overlap we
did that we provided those features in
there as well we also heard from folks
to says really you know would be nice if
we could share some more resources that
were available than to all the clients
that run
network so we provided USB printing as
well there we go one of the biggest
changes actually that we made to this
product was under the hood in the
transition from 802 11 be 280 to da
livin g now if you remember or if you do
a Google and go back to about a year ago
today and look at some of the articles
that were written it wasn't at all clear
that folks believe that else we gotta
live in G would even come close to being
finished and the beginning of this year
as we were shipping the first products
out there were folks there writing the
whole you know wait don't jump in just
yet you don't know if your manufacturer
of your product is going to leave you
behind and actually get you up to the
the final specification well as we
helped in the last week and a half go to
the 11g there's now a standard and we've
also introduced a week after that last
Thursday an airport 3.1 update that
brings all of our users up to 80 to that
11 g compliancy in a free download so
for those of you not as familiar with
you to die 11g we really see this as our
next generation high speed wireless
protocol it's what's going to take us to
the next level what it provides is 54
megabits per second speed so data rates
up to 54 megabits per second which is
nearly five times faster than the older
airport products and this is actually
kind of interesting is maybe something
of cues for you as developers because
now we're talking about bandwidth and
data rates that will support more
intensive media types into some
interesting solutions that could come
out of that it's go 11 g by its nature
is also compatible with these ones in
the same frequency band so it's
available for use in all else in
countries it's essentially platform
agnostic it will work on a mac on a pc
leave on the handheld
so I want to talk a little bit about
momentum in the 802 11 space I think
this is sort of a key trend that's
happened over the course of last year
starting with we go the business if we
look here at this chart receipt
essentially from 2001 to 2002 roughly an
eighteen percent growth in the revenue
generated from 80 to dot 11 products
this is actually quite phenomenal if you
think about it this would have happened
in a time when the technology industry
serve on the slump if you will and some
aspects of wireless as well we're
struggling a little bit but here
wireless LAN dia 211 was actually on the
rise and last year 11.6 million 802 dot
11b clients were actually shipped out
into the market this year it's looking
even better so far the first quarter so
through the end of March this year
nearly 5 million products have been sold
if that trend continues we're talking
about 20 million products out there
which is nearly doubling what we had
last year the one thing you'll note on
the the chart is how fast and how
impactful the introduction of into del
11g was on the market in the course of
three months seventeen percent of the
units that were out there were able to
11g units this was before product was
even sort of an i triple e standard
levels if you will it's actually very
phenomenal see up take that quickly you
know new wireless protocol we're very
bullish on a 02 that 11g we expect that
to to continue although it's 11 b is
also sort of the the mainstay the
workhorse of the air to the living space
so they tend to co-exist probably for
the next couple of years before a total
of Zanjeer serve becomes more dominant
so the other area of momentum I wanted
to talk about was just product momentum
in general so historically L to the 11
has been something that has really been
driven by the computing space whether
it's a notebook or
and in the case of our products desktops
and that will probably continue to be
the case for quite a while but one of
the things we've seen over the course of
the last year or so is new product
categories coming online with 802 11
whether their handhelds or Wi-Fi phones
or appliances that are as simple as
allowing photographs to be sort of
generated over a sort of picture frame
type of a product or having wireless
projectors so as developers you may
think to yourselves well you know the
computer space is kind of tight there's
not a lot more hardware perspective I
can do there is a lot of opportunity now
to expand 80 2011 into new spaces and
actually get development efforts going
in different environments different
product categories and we've ever done
before let's talk a little bit about the
macintosh user adoption we've sold over
2 million Airport products since the
inception in 1999 and in the first
quarter of this year was 150,000 as we
heard in the keynote this morning it's
actually 300,000 as of today which is
pretty phenomenal numbers fact our
Airport business is white-hot it's never
been better we're nearly doubling our
business every year there's a lot of
momentum generated in people adopting
wireless and going Wireless with their
products this is another one of those
slides that's actually very interesting
is that special statistic I was talking
about earlier if you take a look at all
the attitude on 11b products sold of
11.6 million that I had in the previous
slide will find that ten percent of
those products souls were to mac users
802 11 g side eighteen percent this is
pretty phenomenal this is actually very
significant if you think about that the
from a computer perspective our users
make up the top five percent of the
computing market we're talking about 10
and 18 percent adoption rate here so
you're really seeing a user group that
is very pro wireless willing to invest
wireless willing to try out new
solutions and actually get going and the
wireless track so hopefully this is
something for you to take away and
really consider as you're working on
your business plans for your solutions
to really consider max first because
it's the right user group to really get
you going and then if you need to move
on to another platform so the other
thing I want to talk about is location
which was with respect to 80 2011 up to
the end of last year maybe just before
that we talked about wireless locations
it's always been through those
traditional you know buckets it's the
home I can browse the internet from my
couch or I can have multiple systems in
the home share a single connection to
the internet in education I on yrl whole
classroom and I allow kids to really be
able to work where they feel most
comfortable and be still be able to
connect to the resources whether they're
on a campus network or on the Internet
if from the business perspective was
about sort of extending the wired
connection wirelessly to parts of their
office environment that sort of been the
traditional view of locations and
something strange has happened something
Wonderful's happen actually in the
course of the last say six to eight
months we're seeing more locations
coming online that ever before in an
interesting in different places we have
cities this case the example is Paris
this is an effort underway by the city
government in Paris to Wi-Fi enable
ideally I think the goal at the end is
the entire city but starting with the
metro lines so as you're coming in to
work or going home you'll be able to get
online aircraft the traditional you know
verboten as far as any kind of wireless
technology is concerned is now opening
up 802 11 Lufthansa has announced that
they will be putting 802 11 be access
into their 747 aircraft so as I'm
cruising over the Atlantic or Pacific
whatever might be I can actually get
wireless connectivity for thirty dollars
and be able to be productive throughout
the entire flight
we see in New York verizon is unwired
errands and providing hot spots for
users throughout the city so if you're
you know on your way to work in the
mornings happen to stop at the donut
shop you probably can get online just
pay phone you're bored same goes for
coffee shops and bookstores through
operators like t-mobile which currently
have about 2300 hotspots lit up in the
US where you can actually get on and be
able to communicate be connected so all
these different pieces and the kind of
Wohlers is all going what's going to
happen with all this 802 11 stuff well
firstly let's review the attitude l11
technologies so we have an 02 11 b which
i mentioned before is really the the
workhorse Freya 20 11 it has a majority
of products out there it's actually gone
through several generations on the radio
sites in our seeing migration towards
new and different types of product
categories some with much more sensitive
battery and power requirements and you
would have in the computing environment
it's also really the technology of
choice of the standard of choice if you
will for these public area hot spots
since it'll ensures the broadest range
of compatibility into the living g.fast
is performing wireless and out the gates
fastest adopting wireless technology
that's out there really a lot of
excitement around this the numbers are
looking really good people are actually
adopting it very quickly and we expect
it to be the the next generation of
wireless technology lets lift right out
now finally we have added to that 11 a
witch you know I was thinking about this
last night how do you kind of explain
this without you know you can't really
sugarcoat it it hasn't moved much in
fact analysts have told us that last
year a grand total of 100,000 80 to the
11 8 products were sold so there's
really not been a lot of growth during I
think they really missed the
compatibility message and that's really
hurt them
in that camp there's really not a lot of
movement there so what are the takeaways
from int result 11 first off business is
good money is there to be made in this
space it's clearly the case that there's
an upward trend while the market is
going down there are new product
categories coming online so again if
you're not particularly interested in
joining in on the computing side of
things there are opportunities to create
work on solutions that sort of perfectly
work around the computing environment
that would take advantage of this
technology there are more places to
connect than ever before so now you can
actually work on a solution and kind of
be assured that more often than not when
you go out throughout your area your
users go throughout their day and
wherever they sort of stop and pause for
a moment they will be able to get online
there's lots and lots of momentum so I
would definitely encourage you to really
think strongly and go forth into
developing attitude out 11 solutions so
from here I'm actually going to hand it
over to Paul he's going to talk a little
bit about the the actual updates we did
to airport last week
Thank You Lars thank you for that studly
introduction I'll try to live up to the
reputation there I want to talk a little
bit about the software update that we've
done and what we have planned for coming
up into Panther and beyond as far as
mentioned it was a year ago you're in a
month ago last year when we first
started talking about 80 to 11g and
delivered that to you in January just
software update in the spring and did a
pretty significant software update just
last week and is anybody everybody in
here who is running wireless have you
updated to 3.1 yet and not having
troubles I hope so so good that that
really helps the show Network and I'll
talk a lot about some of that as we go
through so I mentioned the 3.1 update
the goals there were first of all
compliance with the I Triple E spec but
once we get into the software we can't
just leave one thing going so we have to
work on multiple things all at the same
time and so we kind of took the top the
top half dozen or so things that we
heard back from customers and feedback
that we got to try to to address some of
those so with the with the draft
specification that we released that we
had in January there were some issues
with performance and robustness so we
address those airport extreme introduced
this concept of a wdf switch the ability
to extend your wireless network
wirelessly so people were asking for
that in large homes are especially in
schools where you want to go from main
campus to a remote classroom without
having to run a wire across the parking
lot or a baseball field WDS is ideal for
that solution but my first
implementation was somewhat complicated
setup and generated a lot of questions
so so we tried to address that the other
thing that comes a lot from developers
especially our request for SNMP support
so SMP to get information about the
network is statistics about the network
so we incorporated corporated some of
that in the firmware update and one
thing that would come up every now and
then that we felt like it would be a
good thing to do is utf-8 character
support so that's really helpful for our
non-us friends who want to publish
network names publish names of base
stations using their native language and
so we allow me to do that now and we'll
show you some slides about that alerts
we go through first was performance so
one of the advantages of delivering a
draft standard if you will is it allows
us to get the product out into a real
world situation and see how it's how
it's really used how it's used beyond
just the theoretical specifications that
engineers like to talk about when you're
in closed rooms so we saw a lot of usage
patterns and scenarios and we address
some of that the early on there were a
couple of common myths that we wanted to
dispel one was that a single 802 11 B
client would drag the entire network
down to 802 11 B speeds and we obviously
didn't want that to happen the other
thing that that people would say is that
the base station next door base station
down the hall those negative 2 11 B base
station would again negatively impact
the performance of your G base station
and so we didn't want to do that either
so a couple of technologies that that
our card firmware vendor delivered to us
is directly directed at improving that
performance in this environment we have
mixed vng clients and networks and lots
of other interference so one is the
technology called frame bursting and
that's every vendor will call it
something else some might call it nitro
this or turbo dad it's just really the
ability to take that amount of time that
you have able to send data and in the
case of a 2 3 11 g since you're sending
it five times as fast you might as well
just send more packets during that time
so so that's kind of a frame bursting is
and the other RT of CPS protection
mechanisms and I always wonder what the
translators are going to do with that
but but basically that's again so you
have a G base station your house your
neighbor has a B base station than you
and you don't know you don't know who
your neighbor is suspected linksys
because you network is called default or
whatever but if you both happen to be
if you both happen to be on the same
channel you know you're going to be
interfering and you don't want to go
over to your neighbor but you probably
could you probably just connect your
neighbors base station and type in admin
admin and reconfigure it for him for his
protection but this protection mechanism
is really just a way for the two base
stations to to cooperate and better
share the bandwidth so when our ji vay
station wants to send some data they'll
say wait a minute I'm going to send some
data the VA station says okay go ahead
and send it and then when it's done that
things go back to normal the other is
improving the robustness of the
connection so again when 802 11 first
came out he was highly controlled and it
would be in these enterprise shops and
everybody would coordinate what channels
are being used and you wouldn't really
have problems with interference but now
that we're selling into more and more
homes and classrooms and small offices
well there's not any kind of integrated
coordinated effort there's just no way
to know what what the base station makes
you what channel numbers are on what
other kind of parameters they have so we
added the ability to look for the best
channel so when the base station starts
up it's going to look around scan the
network and say oh no operate today on
channel 4 so that's just one of
improvements to simplify your
connections the other is kind of a more
low-level thing that happens in the card
firmware so as you know in this 2.4
gigahertz face there's it's unlicensed
so there's a lot of devices that operate
their 802 11 networks or one cordless
phones or another video distribution
system so if you're beaming satellite
something from your living room to your
bedroom all those things are going to
interfere with the network so one to me
so anyway so that the card level again
we just look for sources of that
interference when we see that going on
we get tighten up some filters inside to
better determine whether to accept or
reject packets and that's going to have
a little bit of impact on your
performance so when that noise source of
noise goes away then we go up to a
faster speed and unfortunately in this
particular software update we can't do
that automatically we
do some things automatically but you as
administrator are you as a user will
have to control whether to use this
interference robust so if you've gotten
a 3.1 software update you would notice
in the admin utility there is a check
box to turn it on and in the manufacture
of the client software there's a menu
item that says using reference
robustness so looking at some of the
bulletin board discussions over the past
week there's a lot of confusion about
when to use that when not to use that
basically you shouldn't use that unless
you really need to use that and how do
you know when to use that it's kind of
we don't know so you have to tell us but
but generally if you if you think that
you have this source of interference if
for sure if you have some kind of like
sort of a video distribution system
where you're sending video around your
house you'll almost certainly want to
use it in that environment but in most
other places you probably wouldn't so
it's going to reduce your range it's
going to reduce your throughput so don't
turn it on unless you really need to but
if you're in a place where you can't get
to a network as well try to turn it on
and see if that helps but just be aware
of what that controls 4wds setup was the
wireless distribution system so mission
that was a little bit complicated to set
up in our first release under the covers
it's really very simple it's just that
the base stations have to know the mac
address the airport ID of all the other
base stations that are participating in
this network so in the first release you
probably saw if we tried to set this up
yourself if you have to go around to
every day station pick it up turn it
over find out what its MAC address is go
into configure one of them enter the mac
address the channel WEP key and
everything and then go to the other one
and do the same thing and then go to the
other won't do the same thing and make
sure that they were all coordinated so
that they were all on the same channel
all with the same web key and we thought
well that's kind of silly because it's a
patient Rahl there if the program can
see them all if the network can see them
all then why not just go ahead and
configure them all for you so that's
kind of what this panel does is two
things one is that if you are connected
to what is known as the main base
station which is the base station that's
connected to the internet
come on you just configure that base
station the little plus and minus
buttons there off on the side do little
scan so you can see the other base
stations that are in the in the vicinity
and you disarm it determine whether
those are remote base stations or relay
base stations a relay base station is
something new that was added for this
particular release which is you can go
from your main base station which is
connected to your internet connection to
a real I base station to another real a
magician so you can basically extend
this WDS out as many levels as you would
like they realize that every level of
extension reduces your performance so we
still recommend that you only do this
for two or three or four base stations
that's most but but this panel hopefully
will allow a lot more people to more
easily set it up as I mentioned when we
first started talking about this feature
we first really pictured it in these
kind of class classroom environments
where again there might be an on campus
administrator who would configure
everything set everything up but we
found more and more users or customers
who were just in large houses or house
that was really long and they wanted
internet connection in the front of the
house and remote access through the to
the backyard so more and more regular
customers were using WDS and having
trouble with it and we wanted to make
that easy for them one of the other
other handful of things here that people
kept asking for is the ability to change
the DHCP range so you know if you've
been working with airport for a long
time you know that we distribute address
is in the 1001 range and behind some dsl
routers and behind some other home
network equipment that didn't work out
so so we give you the ability now to set
that deep if you range also the ability
to set the multicast rate and again this
is a source of confusion for a lot of
people we read a lot of comments from
people who say you know my network was
slow so I bumped the multicast right up
to 11 and why didn't Apple set this to
11 by default and and again that's just
kind of a misunderstanding of what the
multicast rate is for bumping it up in
some applications is a good thing to do
but you have to realize that when you do
that you're also reducing
range so don't just bump it to 11
arbitrarily but do that if you need to
and again it depends on the usage in a
typical home where you're just doing
internet access web surfing reading your
mail you would never have to do that if
you want to stream video around your
house you might want to experiment that
but but again realize that it does have
an inverse relationship to your range
and finally these developers who are
more asking for more expensive SNMP
support so I published a myth that's up
on the apple com you tell who the i key
administrators are around here so that
gives you some statistics about what
clients are connected your base station
and it statistics on the physical
interfaces how much data is going
through what kind of error rates are
there and will eventually expose that
through some tool with the admin utility
but right now it's just available
through SNMP and then the international
character sport so this is something new
and we've been wanting to do this for a
while we've always had to worry about
some compatibility issues but we just
decided just kind of bite the bullet and
go with it so I just 211 has this notion
of what is a network name or what we
call an SSID which is just the name that
your network is known by and in this
particular slide so we're showing home
network which is the US version of that
and then we're also showing home network
which i think is the Korean version of
that so the radio doesn't care the radio
just cares there's 32 bytes of data that
says what my network name is it's just
how it gets presented in these kind of
user interface elements where we have to
decide whether it's how to show up in
this case so we're standardizing on
utf-8 everywhere just be aware if you do
this that some PC clients and other
clients may not be able to associate
with your network until they also update
to do this but that is an option and I
think finally how many people here were
at wireless we're using wireless at last
year's WWDC and using wireless at wwc
before that
and wireless at wwt before that and so
maybe these guys are the ones that are
setting up these ibss networks so we
talked about this for the past couple of
years but they finally with airport
extreme we differentiate now between an
infrastructure Network so in this case
home network which is kind of above the
line or a computer computer network
which is showing home network below the
line so in these kind of environments
where there are these mixture of
infrastructure and ad hoc networks an
airport extreme user can choose which
one of those they want to associate with
and in some cases you might want to to
do that but I think before I go on just
just a note about that so you know this
is the first day of a big show and you
probably had some good experiences and
some not good experiences with the
wireless network and just be aware there
are a lot of people working on it
working behind the scenes can make all
that happen at one point this morning
there were over 1,800 simultaneous users
of the network so that's putting a big
strain and stress on everything and in
particular everybody in this room can
help you can help with a bit of social
engineering which is to first of all not
do this yourself but more importantly if
you see other people ask them not to do
this which is do not create you not turn
on internet sharing and use the same
name as the show network and I just it
helps no one and hurts almost everyone
so so don't do that and likewise don't
create the computer to computer network
with the same name as a show network you
know if you want to do that do it with
your own name or do it with your machine
name because there's a guy over here on
the side and you can hold up your little
device there who will come find you so
so we found a few people to this morning
already so that's right so no one feel
looking for you so it just beware and
again so this is a couple things here
one is international characters that one
is the other is this differentiation
between infrastructure networks and
computer computer networks and this is
the interference robustness
menu item that I was talking about so
with that well with the one more thing
one more thing is the windows admin
support so we had a windows admin
utility that worked for the original
snow base station and now we've updated
the windows admin utility for the
extreme base station so very similar to
to the max utility in its usage and
again just that's up on our website
haunting it's not on CD but if you go to
apple.com / airport you will eventually
find your way to it and the last thing
since all of your developers here what
you're most interested in is what kind
of opportunities there are for 802 11
we've talked about API is off and on
through the years and we're starting to
expose some of those AP is and we have
available now under NDA if you want to
do anything that adds value to the
client support like turning power on and
off looking for wireless networks
choosing wireless networks getting
status information we have some api's
are available for that which after we go
through DTS so just send a note to DTS
at apple com and tell them what you want
to do and why I think this API to be
useful to you and we'll see about
getting it to and with that I'll
introduce still carting it's going to
talk a little bit about airport security
and some of the other things we have
planned for the next few months thanks
very much
[Applause]
how's it going I seem to be always
running up and down the halls of Apple
muttering all these acronyms and things
and they said hey nobody understands
what you're talking about so why don't
you explain it to us and explain it to
the developers because this stuff is
coming down the pike and it would be
good if everybody knows about it because
there are some assumptions that
sometimes people make in their
networking applications that you can't
make when people secure the network so
the first thing I'm going to talk about
is something that is near and dear to
everybody's hearts who does i.t and
wants to actually secure their network
and that's 802 dot1x 802 dot1x is an i
triple e standard for layer to network
security what that means is you can in a
wireless access point but also on a
wireless network you can do
authentication on that network before
the person is allowed to access network
resources basically what 802 dot1x says
is that restricting physical access to
the medium is not sufficient for
security so any of you have worked in
the DoD or any other government sites
know that they've had 802 dot1x on their
wired networks for a long time and 802
dot1x has become the basis for the new
security infrastructure of wireless
networks that I'll talk about in a
little bit as you can see here if you
run your Panther CD you will find an 802
dot1x supplicant as part of internet
connect one of the tabs that you'll see
as they go to don't want X and you can
do your configuration either for a
wireless the wire lot of the airport
interface or else for the wired network
we encourage you to try it out we've
tried it out against service from fonk
Microsoft Cisco on others and it works
for us but we really would like your
feedback on what works and what doesn't
work so that by the time we should
Panther we have a really good 802 dot1x
up looking in there that everybody is
happy about as you can see doing a tour
to that 1x authentication you enter in
what port you're doing your username
password or if you're doing
a an EAP type EAP is the extensible
authentication protocol which is used in
concert with 80 to that 1x for what type
of security you're doing the supplicant
that's in Panther supports ttls TLS lead
to peep in md5 if you don't know what
those are and want to know what they are
you can go look on the web or come find
me sometime during this week and in my
ear and I'll explain them in
excruciating detail so whoever wants to
understand each one for any of the
authentication types that don't use
passwords stuff like TLS there's full
support keychain support for digital
certificates and stuff in there so again
I wholeheartedly encourage all of you to
try it and send us feedback and let us
know how it works for it that leads me
into a thing that we call WPA what is
wpa well I call it strong a strong
interoperable replacement for web now
everybody here who's familiar with
wireless should know what weapons web
stands for wired equivalency privacy
it's the security and I use that term
loosely that's on your wireless network
today the problem with WEP is it was
originally used just secure the radio
link at a time when the only place that
they had wireless networking was on like
machine shop floors and things like that
and people weren't actually using it for
data the problems are you know uses
64-bit shared keys with only a 24-bit
initialization vector this means that
either keys you know as you've read all
the horror stories you know the keys are
easily recovered there's no forgery
protection there's no replay protection
the same key is shared by everybody
using that access point so once the key
is correct they have access to
everybody's network traffic that's on
that base station or access point so an
industry consortium called the Wi-Fi
alliance or Wi-Fi which is where the
term Wi-Fi wireless fidelity comes from
they got together and said okay what we
want to do
is we want to try and make things more
secure we need a software firmware fix
for existing devices out there that's
crossed vendor compatible and operate
from the enterprise the home everywhere
and can solve all these problems so they
came up with this thing called WPA or
Wi-Fi Protected access it's actually a
subset of 802 11 I i know there's every
letter in the alphabet for 802 11 and
sorry to keep them straight but again if
you want to come talk about all of them
more than happy to the difference is
with wpa improved data encryption and
says T kept their in parentheses
basically what that means is instead of
a 24-bit it uses a 48-bit initialisation
vector now 22 the 48 is a big number you
know that's like over 500 trillion so
it's a really good place to start when
doing your encryption it has user based
authentication so in enterprise and Soho
situations use 802 dot1x of the AP and
you authenticate every user before they
get access to the access point and
people who don't have authentication
can't get on the access point it uses
key Kip which is the temporal key
integrity protocol to make per packet
keys so unlike the static key that's in
web it's generating new keys all the
time so every time it feels like well
things might be getting a little bit
insecure here because there's about you
know 20,000 packets or less maybe we'll
change the key all this 802 dot1x stuff
is all radius based so if you have
radius servers you can hook them up to
whatever directory system you want and
it'll all just work right I'm testing
that I've done with wpa has been
wonderful if you have any questions
about WPA you know because I know there
were a lot of people who are familiar in
the wireless industry saying hey when is
Apple going to make a wpa announcement
well there you go Panther will include
WPA support when it ships by the end of
the year whenever Panther ships beyond
that is 802 11 I which is the future of
wireless security 802 WPA or Wi-Fi
Protected access is actually a subset of
802 11 that they brought the pieces in
that they need for legacy equipment
I'm 802 11 I is going to be an i triple
e standard but it's not likely to be
ratified before 2004 the folks in Wi-Fi
decided they couldn't wait till 2004
with everybody yelling and screaming
that their networks were insecure so
we've taken all the pieces for those
that didn't know Apple as a member of
the Wi-Fi Alliance we've taken all those
pieces that are there for legacy
equipment to make sure that everybody
could have good interoperable security
in the home in the home there's a mode
of wpa called pre-shared key which is
400 million times more secure than web
and for the enterprise you can use 8021
X with EAP Wi-Fi is currently
investigating a thing called wpa2 or
Wi-Fi Protected access to which replaces
the rc4 algorithm with aes we don't know
if we're going to get there before 802
11 I is ratified simply for two reasons
you know currently with wpa we do the
best possible fix that we can to
minimize performance degradation on
existing equipment and as everybody
knows AES requires a little more
computing resources unless there is a
flaw found in another flaw found in this
implementation of our c4 or in one of
the other pieces of wpa like T Kippur
Mike they're probably not going to do
wpa and wpa2 anytime soon so you know
I'm just here to tell you don't worry
we're tracking all the security we're
tracking all the standards we're
implementing all the standards for you
it's going to be part of Panther there
are developer opportunities if you want
to put this stuff into legacy operating
systems I would encourage you to do so
there's a big push for people who have
macs in the enterprise to be able to
support this stuff and I think it's a
lot of fun with that I'll turn it back
over to large Raider and he's going to
talk about Bluetooth love my proximity
detectors
alright let's transition out of wireless
you can that move over to wireless USB
which is what we refer to as bluetooth
bluetooth for us is really the
peripheral solution of choice it's the
way to unwire the the peripherals that
connect to your computer and it does so
in a way that's actually very powerful
I'll kind of go through some of that
it's very simple to use we've made it
very simple to use for a user to be able
to connect to have a device there's
security built into Bluetooth as well so
you can have an encrypted connection
between the two devices 128-bit
encryption encryption there's also the
concept of pairing so as an application
developer you can decide what is
appropriate for whatever the task is the
user is doing you can you can limit what
the user can actually communicate with
and actually force a trusted connection
between the computer and the other
device so you have a lot of flexibility
there on the security side Bluetooth is
also extremely versatile you have a core
specification and around that and sort
of what fans out from that are various
profiles and essentially the profiles
sort of mapped to different types of
devices and allows you to unwire various
types of peripherals around your
computer and the connections are also
very reliable at the radio level you can
always make a connection as always it's
always very reliable there's no real
issue there as far as that goes so these
all sort of contribute to a very good
user experience around bluetooth now as
far as our development is concerned you
probably remember from last year when we
first introduced bluetooth is part of
Jaguar we introduced profiles that
supported cereal so basically a serial
cable virtual cable type of replacement
object push dial-up networking and
synchronization and things that we've
added in to additional profiles FTP and
hid support as well now I'm not actually
going to go into those in detail here
but I would encourage you if you're all
interested in this too
you join in the session tomorrow morning
where they're going to talk about
Bluetooth in much more detail you got a
couple of guys from the Bluetooth team
and engineering sides really dive down a
lot i tail what I want to focus on
instead is talking a little bit about
we're losing this come and kind of where
we are today how we're moving forward
essentially if we look at there we go we
look at the years from 98 to about 2002
those are really the early adopter phase
of the early years if you will well
there were fewer units sold last year
there's 20 million units shipped out
into the markets that was a little bit
momentum there at the very end but not a
lot of initial movement the solutions
themselves were mainly external in
nature and some integrated the
integration coming primarily on the
mobile phone side of things and from a
software perspective the connections
were pretty basic so while the
connections that the radio level were
pretty reliable I think are still
cutting our Keith on you I in general so
for any of you who have actually played
around Bluetooth from those years you
probably remember a lot of fiddling
around and throwing switches and levers
to actually get a phone to talk to a
headset or a handheld to talk to a phone
to get to the internet exciter and also
in this time frame there was a lot of
ups and downs in terms of where
Bluetooth was going the original
objective was to be a cable replacement
technology the premier wireless cable
replacement technology and that was all
fine and good and somewhere in there was
a bunch of folks that came on board at
the special interest group level decided
to move into networking as well and
thereby causing sort of this confusion
around you know what is the right thing
that mean is it Bluetooth of networking
technology or the cable replacement
that's one of the reasons why we put up
that matrix slide which is the first one
I showed you to sort of help clarify
some of that if we fast-forward or come
to this year essentially what we're
seeing is we're seeing some momentum now
in the number of units being shipped
probably not mainstream yet but we're
getting really close to sort of crossing
that chasm and again to the point where
we're going to
bluetooth and more more more types of
devices the small hardware perspective
it's much more integrated now from a
solutions perspective and less external
less external dongles are connecting
into devices the UI we sort of figure
that out now I think generally speaking
and it's much easier now much better
integration across the different devices
in terms of the user being able to
engage as find bluetooth within whatever
it is they're doing and networking thank
God is gone as far as Bluetooth is
concerned it's strictly a cable
replacement technology which is what it
should be now if we project forward to
next year we're in a position to really
dramatically increase the number of
units that are going to ship out into
the market will most likely see only
integrated solutions that maybe onesies
and twosies in terms of form or
externally plug-in type of solutions but
the main transition I think we're going
to see where we need to see this is kind
of where you guys will come into play
for any of the application developers
that are out there so we need to achieve
a level of transparency in wireless that
allows the user to sort of engage with
Bluetooth at the task level within the
application so I wanted to sort of talk
a little bit about custom of our design
goals and show you some examples of that
from a Bluetooth perspective we set out
to really make Bluetooth and easy
elegant useful solution for the user I
think we've done a pretty good job what
we we've done is provided a bluetooth
menu extra so this is something we're
basically stealing a page of the airport
book and providing a one-click access
for the user to the most important
Bluetooth features that they need be it
on/off discoverability and being able
seven other device this makes it much
easier for a user to actually approach
and engage with Bluetooth we also added
in a setup assistant so one of the
things that the Bluetooth special
interest group still is in the process
of figuring out is how to make the
overall pairing experience easier to use
and that's something that will take a
little bit longer as these be sort of
larger bodies you know take their time
of sort of sort through that kind of
stuff and in the interim what we've
provided it
is a very easy way for user to be able
to set up a connection between a
computer and a peripheral device
essentially we've done is we've broken
up this series of steps into a much more
digestible pieces for the user to be
able to go through and work their way
through the process it has been
tremendously helpful for them to get
started and get going the other thing
that we've provided which is actually
also very useful for the user from the
user experience perspective is device
filtering so if you were to go out there
and search for devices say you know
you've got an application where you want
to send a message out and you want to be
able to do it through a phone that you
can actually filter by the type of
device and the user is only exposed to
the things they really need to choose
from you don't see other types of
devices pop up on the list this is
particularly useful at larger
conferences granted this is sort of
extreme but last week I was at the
Bluetooth Congress and you do a
discovery there and you come back with
75 devices if you don't filter which is
which is a bit extreme for user have to
go through and find the right one we've
also built Bluetooth in to the hardware
starting with the 12 and 17 inch
powerbook switch are introduced in
January and shortly thereafter
introduced models of the imac and Power
Mac where you can get bluetooth as well
so we're very bullish on Bluetooth as a
technology to really unwire your desktop
or may travel yeah mobility perspective
to be able to unwire the cables that you
know you don't really have to take with
you when you're traveling so now I want
to talk or show you actually some
examples of Bluetooth solutions that are
out there from a synchronization
perspective messaging remote control and
basically turning your mobile phone into
a modem and one of the things you'll
notice as we walk through these sort of
the common denominator across all the
examples is the level of transparency
that exists so that the user is removed
from the complexity of Bluetooth and is
really just thinking about the tasks
that they're working with
the first one is I think so i think is
the application that we developed last
year which allows you to take your most
important information with you be a
calendar or contact information kind of
where it kind of follows you around
wherever you go across the different
types of devices you would carry with
you one of the main sort of benefits of
this is being able to send your contacts
back and forth from a computer to a
mobile phone and transport for that is
primarily bluetooth now if you look
actually at this example of the screen
and the user all I really do is worry
about checking the phone selecting the
phone and pushing the sync button
there's no bluetooth engagement beyond
that we've actually built that into the
setup process so that when you actually
set the mobile phone you can opt to have
synchronizations part of that it is the
address book this is actually a really
fun application from a Bluetooth
perspective if you haven't used it I
urge you to try it it's really great it
actually allows you to move forward some
of the voice applications that you'd
find in a mobile phone over to the
computer and I could be working and when
I have an inbound call I could see a
caller ID come up if any to send someone
a message i can do that via SMS rocket
dial from the address book these are all
done over bluetooth and again the level
of Bluetooth complexity here is limited
to the one button that's there in the
upper left-hand corner as far as the
user being able to turn that on but
beyond that it's sort of sort of handled
this is also a great application a lot
of fun it essentially takes your sony
ericsson phone and turns it into a
remote control for your computer
extremely powerful and that youth it's
based on apple script so you can extend
it any which way you like it does come
with a number of scripts that allows you
to navigate through itunes and different
songs and albums and so forth as well as
dvds or run a presentation from keno to
powerpoint but it's sort of again if you
look at the UI here the user is focused
in on what the remote control function
should be what the action should be and
there's really no reference to blue to
in here at all which is the way it
should be bluetooth should become
transparent to the user and very sore
seamless in the overall experience
there's another solution that's out
there called mobile high speed and this
provides sort of if there's three
elements to the phone one a
synchronization the other sort of voice
oriented solutions for voice
applications the other is data and
removing the complexity of being able to
get on to a 2.5 g or GPRS network from
the user so it's a very seamless
experience this application actually
handles that and provides again that
connection over a Bluetooth link and
makes all those levers and switches that
are sort of required banish from the
user and they just get on which is great
so I like to do is actually provide you
some tips if you're working on or
thinking about Bluetooth solutions these
are generated from a sort of low sleep
cycle high caffeine sort of type of the
environment that we work it in for a
while but I think they're they're pretty
useful to sort of use as guidelines one
it's the challenges bandage that for a
long period of time Bluetooth has been
extremely hard to find for a user in
fact if you go to some type of devices
you could go five layers deep on the UI
before you even find any kind of
reference to bluetooth at all and having
this kind of barrier to the user sort of
inhibits or prevents users from actually
engaging with the technology and using
it so if you're working on a solution we
really encourage you to move Bluetooth
way higher up in the UI hierarchy if you
will so the user can quickly get to lose
lose at least be able to turn on one of
the other challenges that discovery is
an easy constant people get that but
it's not always straightforward and
again this goes back to the filtering
show the user only the types of devices
they really need for the test that
they're working on and not the whole
list of everything that's out there in
the room pairing is difficult I
mentioned this before there's a lot of
different steps involved they need to be
done in a sequence and again this is
something that the bluetooth sig is
looking at fixing in the longer term
in the shorter term what we really
recommend if you're working on bluetooth
unless the data you're sending
absolutely needs to be secure avoid
pairing rather than doing pairing
remember where you've been allow
connections remember that connection
expose that to the user at first they
can choose off of a cache list and then
they can get right back into where they
are we found is essentially that most
users will wind up connecting to about
the same six or seven types of devices
so there's a good chance that if they go
in you remember that connection double
go right to that same spot again it'll
make it a very easy experience now if
you do need a pair because the data
sensitive then go ahead and do that but
again I wouldn't make that a default so
I'll possible so the other sort of
challenge for bluetooth is that there's
limited bandwidth available over the
Bluetooth link and really need to be
cognizant of what you're sending over
the air and think of Bluetooth is
wireless USB it's a small pipe don't try
to send large amounts of information
over that be very selective of what you
do with it otherwise the user experience
will suffer and people like getting a
bad feeling about the overall solution
you don't really want that to happen
okay so um to the last section here what
I really want to talk about is where we
can or start a dialogue on is where we
can take wireless from here I'd be
interested to get your reactions at the
end of the QA process so from a user
perspective what we're seeing is that
users have more and more wireless
technologies that are either using
whether it's a mobile phone or a
cordless phone bluetooth in a computer
or a handheld you know all different
types whether it's 802 11 etc and
there's different things that they can
do with that for them it's harder to
sort of keep it all straight they don't
really they're having a difficult time
now to remember which steps are which
for which wireless technology and really
what they're after is again a level of
abstraction from the technology they
want the applications or the developers
to you know in their apps and sort of
take care of that for them so it's a
very seamless and transparent
experience for them so I think needs to
happen next is really we need to get to
a stage where applications take more
control over that experience and provide
that level of transparency so that
connections from a wireless respective
are done our sort of task driven and
done at that level rather than at the
system level so the user can focus in on
what they're trying to do which is to
create or share collaborate and not
really worry about I got to connect its
associate or I need to do some discovery
to be able to get this to work the other
thing too I think applications should
start to drive towards is being more
efficient about their bandwidth and know
what kind of connection there on and
based off of that adjust their features
accordingly an example I always like to
use as email so if I'm on a pretty wide
pipe whether it's wired Ethernet
connection or an 802 11 connection I can
probably bring down my attachments and
all that pretty straightforward easily
not really a bad situation for the user
if I try to emulate that over a
narrowband connection where it's a
Bluetooth the mobile phone GPRS type of
connection you kind of almost want to
have the attachments stay up on the
server and the user to bring those down
you know as they choose there should be
something that happens transparently for
the user and not something they have to
remember to go do so one of the things I
want to talk about here was really where
as an example let's talk about the the
meeting place and kind of what it
represents today from a wireless
perspective and then perhaps some of the
things we could do going forward to
really take it up to the next level if
we think about the meeting place today
it's really about people coming together
where they can again we can share they
can collaborate then create stuff and
having come together they leave having
done something better at the end of that
and in that process typically they'll
wind up connecting two different
tensions equipment or networks and
different devices that are you know that
they take with them into the meeting
so I wanted to show you some examples of
what's available today that sort of
address that today you can actually go
into a meeting and wirelessly you know
present whatever slides you might have
to an audience using a do to that 11
connection in this case example is from
from in focus you can also at the end
say at the end of that presentation work
sort of on a whiteboard type of
environment and collaborate and sort of
work on next steps and so forth and then
wirelessly be able to move that back
over to a computer and then have it
distributed via email or whatnot Andy
beam is working on something like that
in a meeting room you'll typically find
law the handheld so this is something
where you could actually synchronize or
send a business card over the wireless
connection even between handhelds that
can actually communicate and chat please
the types of activities that typically
go on in the meeting with respect to
handhelds then there's the mobile phone
well it's for users will come in with a
mobile phone and here again with using
an application like address book you can
you know filter the calls that come in
respond via SMS and do some of those
things as well as any synchronization it
needs to happen while you're in that
meeting but if you really step back and
look at that these are different kinds
of things there in that meeting room
it's really about connecting my stuff to
something and I think that the next
level of wireless solutions really come
from an environment where we have
achieved sort of this transparency and
application awareness of what you're
connected to and transition that model
is not just about my stuff connecting to
something but I can check my stuff to
your stuff so take that virtual cable
from a Bluetooth connection you know
unplug it from my mobile phone maybe I
plug it into your mobile phone we can do
something interesting that way but it's
a whole nother environment I think that
sort of untapped at this point that
really allows and fosters collaboration
using wireless connections in the
various resources that are available in
that room this is something that you
know if somebody really think about and
and sort of drive towards Earth or work
to in your plans as your
because you're working on your wireless
solutions so in summary what have we
learned over the course of the last hour
so remember the matrix so again this is
a probably one of the more important
positioning slides you'll see from the
wireless perspective attitude on 11
equals wireless Ethernet Bluetooth
equals wireless USB Mac users love
wireless we can see that from their
early adoption of 802 11 g and from the
market share positions that they hold
which is much larger than what we have
in the computer side of things 802 dot11
has a lot of momentum behind it from a
business perspective or product
perspective from a connectivity
perspective so it's a really good
environment to start working on
solutions there for 3 1 it's a great
product great update to the airport
extreme platform oops bluetooth is on
the rise it's getting wings there's more
and more products going out there it's
getting easier and easier to use and
it's really a great environment to start
some development in no peripheral
perspective and in following along lines
with some of those examples I showed you
in the different applications that are
available via bluetooth I think longer
term wireless transparency is the key
remove the whole category forward for
the user and really generate greater
adoption and really drive it you know
beyond where it is today so with that
there's a slide here that shows the
places you can go to get it additional
information there are three other
sessions that sort of are complementary
to this one that are available
throughout the course of this Developers
Conference we encourage you to go to the
one tomorrow is on Bluetooth one that I
mentioned earlier it be very interesting
for those of you who want to get more
detail into the profiles and such
you